Protein acetylation dynamics in response to carbon overflow in Escherichia coli

ABSTRACT
In Escherichia coli, acetylation of proteins at lysines depends largely on a non-enzymatic acetyl-phosphate-dependent mechanism. To assess the functional significance of this post-translational modification, we first grew wild-type cells in buffered tryptone broth with glucose, and monitored acetylation over time by immunochemistry. Most acetylation occurred in stationary phase and paralleled glucose consumption and acetate excretion, which began upon entry into stationary phase. Transcription of rprA, a stationary phase regulator, exhibited similar behavior. To identify sites and substrates with significant acetylation changes, we used label-free, quantitative proteomics to monitor changes in protein acetylation. During growth, both the number of identified sites and the extent of acetylation increased with considerable variation among lysines from the same protein. Since glucose-regulated lysine acetylation was predominant in central metabolic pathways and overlapped with acetyl-phosphate-regulated acetylation sites, we deleted the major carbon regulator CRP and observed a dramatic loss of acetylation that could be restored by deleting the enzyme that degrades acetyl phosphate. We propose that acetyl-phosphate-dependent acetylation is a response to carbon flux that could regulate central metabolism.

INTRODUCTION
Compelling evidence shows that Nε-lysine acetylation is an abundant post-translational modification in bacteria (Baeza et al., 2014; Kim et al., 2013; Kuhn et al., 2014; Lee et al., 2013; Okanishi et al., 2013; Wang et al., 2010; Weinert et al., 2013; Wu et al., 2013; Xu et al., 2010; Yu et al., 2008; Zhang et al., 2009; Zhang et al., 2013). Two distinct mechanisms have been reported for Nε-lysine acetylation in bacteria. One mechanism is enzymatic (Fig. 1i) and relies on a lysine acetyltransferase (KAT) to catalyze donation of the acetyl group from acetyl-coenzyme A (acetyl-CoA) to the ε-amino group of a lysine (Choudhary et al., 2014; Hentchel and Escalante-Semerena, 2015; Hu et al., 2010; Thao and Escalante-Semerena, 2011). The second mechanism is non-enzymatic (Fig. 1ii), whereby acetyl phosphate directly donates its acetyl group to the deprotonated lysine ε-amino group (Kuhn et al., 2014; Weinert et al., 2013). In either case, the reaction results in the formation of a N-acetyllysine moiety within the target protein. Although quite stable, this modification can be reversed enzymatically by lysine deacetylases (KDACs). In E. coli K-12, YfiQ (also known as Pka, Pla and PatZ) is the only known KAT, while the NAD+-dependent sirtuin CobB (Fig. 1iii) appears to be the sole or predominant KDAC (AbouElfetouh et al., 2014).
We and others recently confirmed the high abundance of Nε-lysine acetylation in wild-type E. coli K-12 and certain acetylation-relevant mutants (Baeza et al., 2014; Castano-Cerezo et al., 2014a; Castano-Cerezo et al., 2014b; Colak et al., 2013; Kuhn et al., 2014). In our own studies of E. coli K-12, for example, we used a peptide-based affinity enrichment strategy with anti-acetyllysine antibodies (Rardin et al., 2013; Zhang et al., 2009) to detect 2730 unique acetylated lysine residues on 806 acetylated E. coli proteins (Kuhn et al., 2014). The majority of Nε-lysine acetylations in wild-type cells depended on the synthesis of acetyl phosphate, while the KAT YfiQ played a much smaller role (Kuhn et al., 2014; Weinert et al., 2013).
In the same study, we also determined that 592 lysines from 292 proteins were sensitive to acetyl phosphate levels (Kuhn et al., 2014). Mass spectrometric and crystallographic methods revealed this mechanism to be specific: the molecular environment of an acetyl phosphate-sensitive lysine must be able to bind the phosphoryl group, properly position the acetyl group, and deprotonate the substrate lysine (Kuhn et al., 2014).
Several groups have investigated the role of the KDAC CobB in E. coli (Baeza et al., 2014; Castano-Cerezo et al., 2014a; Colak et al., 2013; Kuhn et al., 2014). We recently reported that CobB could reverse acetyl phosphate-dependent acetylation, but found that it deacetylated only a fraction of acetyl phosphate-sensitive sites detected in vivo. In fact, only twenty-four lysines sites appeared to be sensitive to both acetyl phosphate and CobB (AbouElfetouh et al., 2014). The apparent lack of association between acetyl phosphate- and CobB-sensitive lysines raises the question: how do cells regulate acetyl phosphate-dependent acetylation?
To answer this question, we grew wild-type E. coli K-12 in buffered tryptone broth (TB7) supplemented with glucose or lactate, and used Western immunoblot analysis and peptide-based affinity enrichment followed by label-free, quantitative mass spectrometry, i.e., Skyline MS1 Filtering (Schilling et al., 2012), to monitor dynamic Nε-lysine acetylation in a time-dependent fashion. On the basis of these studies, and data generated from mutants of the major carbon regulator CRP, we propose that carbon flux exceeding the capacity of the central metabolic pathways (overflow metabolism) causes acetyl phosphate-dependent acetylation and that this response to overflow metabolism can be used to regulate the flow of carbon through central metabolic pathways.

RESULTS

IMMUNOBLOT ANALYSIS OF CARBON-INDUCED ACETYLATION
We previously demonstrated that glucose induces global acetylation in E. coli K-12 cells grown in TB7, and that this induction occurs between mid-exponential growth and early stationary phase (Kuhn et al., 2014). To obtain a more precise assessment, we grew wild-type cells (strain BW25113, Table I) at 37°C in TB7 supplemented with 0.4% glucose. Each hour for 10 hrs and then again at 24 hrs, we monitored growth (Fig. 2A), harvested cells, normalized for loading (Fig. 2B), and performed a Western immunoblot analysis using anti-acetyllysine antibodies (Fig. 2C). The signal intensity of the global acetylation profile increased steadily, but the vast majority of that increase occurred after cells had entered stationary phase (after 4 hrs) and continued until some point between 10 and 24 hrs. This behavior is not restricted to glucose, as we observed similar behavior when TB7 was supplemented with 0.4% lactate (Fig. S1A).
To determine whether the timing of carbon addition mattered, we grew wild-type cells (BW25113) in TB7. At each hr, we added 0.4% glucose (Fig. 3A) or 0.8% lactate (Fig. S1B). After 10 hrs of incubation, we harvested the cells and performed anti-acetyllysine Western immunoblot analysis. Acetylation was strongest if the supplemental carbon source was added before 3 hrs, and signal intensity was substantially less intense with longer delays before carbon addition. However, weak acetylation was not due to insufficient exposure to the supplemental carbon source, as further acetylation did not result from additional incubation time, up to 10 hours following the addition of glucose (Fig. S1C).
To determine if acetylation induction required continuous exposure to the supplemental carbon source, we grew wild-type cells (BW25113) in TB7 or in TB7 supplemented with 0.4% glucose, swapped media every hour from 3 to 8 hrs, continued incubation until 10 hrs, and performed anti-acetyllysine immunoblot analysis (Fig. S2). With this experimental design, cells that had been exposed to glucose from the beginning (0 hr) were further incubated in media that had never contained glucose, and vice versa. The longer the cells were exposed to glucose or its metabolic products, the stronger the increase in acetylation. We conclude that carbon-induced protein acetylation in stationary phase occurs only if cells are exposed to a supplemental carbon source during exponential growth and only if they remain in that medium throughout stationary phase.
To identify the physiological relevance of increased acetylation, we monitored transcription from the canonical RcsB-dependent rprA promoter, which we previously reported was sensitive to acetyl phosphate-dependent acetylation (Hu et al., 2013). We used a λPrprA-lacZ lysogen of BW25113 (strain AJW3759, Table I), in which rprA is fused transcriptionally to lacZ and the fusion carried on prophage λ (Majdalani et al., 2002). We grew these cells at 37°C in TB7, added 0.4% glucose each hour from 0 to 6 hrs, and monitored growth (Fig. 3B) and β-galactosidase activity as a measure of rprA transcription (Fig. 3C). Cultures exposed to glucose by 3 hrs grew more rapidly, but began their transition to stationary phase earlier than cultures exposed to glucose at a later time. As we previously reported (Hu et al., 2013), rprA transcription peaked during early exponential growth. This activity occurred whether or not glucose was added; however, three distinct patterns were apparent: (i) an early small rprA transcription peak associated with supplementation at or before 3 hrs, (ii) a later larger peak associated with no glucose supplementation or supplementation at 5 and 6 hrs, and (iii) an intermediate behavior associated with supplementation at 4 hrs. Similarly, rprA transcription upon entry into stationary phase depended on glucose supplementation and its timing. The strongest induction of protein acetylation occurred if glucose was added by 3 hrs, diminished substantially if glucose was supplemented at 4 hrs, and did not occur if glucose was supplemented at 5 and 6 hrs. These results closely parallel those observed for supplemental carbon source-induced acetylation (Fig. 3A) and support the hypothesis that glucose-induced acetylation has physiological relevance.

QUALITATIVE MASS SPECTROMETRIC ANALYSIS OF ACETYLATION
To obtain a more precise understanding of supplemental carbon-induced acetylation, we analyzed several acetyllysine enriched peptide fractions at different time points by mass spectrometry. First, we grew wild-type cells (strain BW25113) in TB7 or TB7 supplemented with 0.4% glucose for 12 hrs (Fig. S3A). Glucose-exposed cells were harvested at 2, 5, 8 and 12 hrs; those not exposed to glucose were harvested at 12 hrs. Second, total proteins fractions were isolated, digested with trypsin, enriched for peptides containing acetylated lysines (Kac sites), and analysed by LC-MS/MS (tandem mass spectrometry). In all cases, we carried out 3 independent biological and 3 technical replicates for each time point or growth condition (Fig. S3B–C). From these MS/MS spectra, we identified a total of 2813 unique acetylated lysines on 780 unique acetylated proteins (Table S1–S2). Most acetylated proteins were acetylated on one, two or three lysines; however, 30% of proteins were acetylated on >3 lysines (Fig. S4A–B; Table S3). Similar to our previous observations (Kuhn et al., 2014; Rardin et al., 2013), the Kac sites did not distribute equally across all proteins. The number of Kac sites per protein showed a slight correlation with the total number of lysines per protein but not with its molecular weight (Fig. S4C–H, Table S3).
Growth for 12 hrs in TB7 supplemented with glucose resulted in substantially more protein acetylation (2338 Kac sites, 705 proteins) than growth for 12 hrs in TB7 without glucose (451 Kac sites, 216 proteins) (Table II), confirming our previous hypothesis (Kuhn et al., 2014). For details of proteins and lysine sites that are acetylated without glucose supplementation, see Table S1B. During growth in TB7 with glucose, the number of unique Kac sites increased over time (1068, 1658, 2226, and 2338 at 2, 5, 8, and 12 hrs, respectively). A similar trend was observed for acetylated proteins (Table II). However, many of the acetylated lysines and proteins detected at 12 hrs had already been detected at 2 hrs. This overlap of unique Kac sites identified across the glucose time course is depicted by a Venn diagram (Figure S4I), which shows that 889 unique Kac sites were identified by MS/MS at all time points. We hypothesize that the observed increase in global acetylation across the time course observed by Western analysis (Fig. 2B) results from (i) detection of more Kac sites over time and (ii) increased acetylation levels of previously detected Kac sites, as further investigated using quantitative mass spectrometry (see below). Both occur with longer exposure to glucose.

QUANTITATIVE MASS SPECTROMETRIC ANALYSIS OF ACETYLATION
To test this hypothesis, we used label-free mass spectrometry (Schilling et al., 2012) to quantify relative Kac site changes (i) between wild-type cells (strain BW25113) grown for 12 hrs in TB7 with or without glucose and (ii) between 4 time points (2, 5, 8 and 12 hrs) during growth of wild-type cells in TB7 supplemented with glucose (Fig. S3A). All quantifications were performed on 3 biological and technical replicates, and Kac site changes (Table S4) were normalized for potential changes in protein level during the tested conditions (Fig. S3B).
Changes to acetylation of individual lysines were both robust and dynamic. About half of all observed Kac sites exhibited statistically significant changes in acetylation (> 2 fold, p-value ≤0.05). The observed fold changes per Kac site were broadly distributed, with many sites exhibiting very high fold changes (Fig. 4A and Fig. S5A–D). In cells grown in the presence of glucose relative to those grown in its absence, acetylation of 1081 lysines on 406 proteins increased significantly (Fig. 4A, Table S4A) with a median acetylation increase of 7.5-fold. Similarly, over the glucose time course, acetylation of 1091 lysines on 420 proteins increased significantly (Fig. S5A, Table S4B) with a median relative acetylation change of 2.7-fold (5h/2h), 5.7-fold (8h/2h), and 6.6-fold (12h/2h). Figure S5B–D depicts the dynamic nature of relative acetylation changes during the time course.
The vast majority (~90%) of these regulated Kac sites were both time and glucose dependent, as displayed in a Venn diagram (Fig. 4B). This concordance suggests that, during growth in TB7 supplemented with glucose, the increase in acetylation over time is a response to glucose. Fig. 4C displays the sequence motif surrounding glucose-regulated Kac sites (Table S5). This sequence motif is extremely similar to the motif determined for acetyl phosphate-regulated Kac sites (Kuhn et al., 2014), supporting the hypothesis that glucose-regulated sites are acetyl phosphate-regulated sites. Finally, as expected of any proteomic enrichment strategy, the distribution of glucose regulated Kac sites per protein showed some correlation with the estimated protein abundance (Ishihama et al., 2008) (Fig. S6A–B, Table S6).
We previously proposed that acetyl phosphate-regulated acetylation was specific (Kuhn et al., 2014). Our results here extend that observation, showing that lysines on the same protein exhibit different acetylation rates with different fold acetylation changes over time (Fig. 5). For example, we quantified changes for 8 Kac on the TCA cycle enzyme isocitrate dehydrogenase (IDH) and 10 Kac on the TCA cycle enzyme malate dehydrogenase (MDH). Each lysine was acetylated to a different extent (fold change) often at a different rate, with some increasing slowly and steadily and others increasing rapidly and substantially. Such ‘dynamic protein acetylation displays,’ as shown in Fig. 5, were generated for all regulated acetylated proteins (>400) and all corresponding (>1000) regulated Kac sites and uploaded to the MassIVE ftp server and Panorama Public (see Methods). For many, but not all lysines, acetylation peaked by 8 hrs. This was a general behavior, as the fold change distribution did typically not differ substantially between 8 and 12 hours (for details of all acetylation sites, see Table S4A–B).

REGULATED ACETYLATION IS ENRICHED IN METABOLIC PATHWAYS
The proteins with Kac sites that were regulated in response to time and/or glucose were predominantly those involved in central metabolism (Table III, Table S7). These included pathways that metabolize sugars (glycolysis/gluconeogenesis and pentose phosphate pathway), the TCA cycle and the glyoxylate bypass (citrate cycle and glyoxylate/dicarboxylate metabolism), and fatty acid biosynthesis. It also included pyruvate metabolism, which links these central metabolic pathways and processes. Figure 6 shows the dynamic glucose-regulated acetylations of TCA cycle and glyoxylate bypass proteins, whereas Figure S7 shows the dynamic nature of the acetylation process for glycolysis: the Embden-Meyerhoff-Parnas and Pentose Phosphate pathways. Figure S8A shows that most central metabolic enzymes are regulated by both glucose and acetyl phosphate (Table S8). This relationship was general, as 53% (228/440) of the glucose-regulated proteins and 33% (397/1201) of the glucose-regulated lysines were also regulated by acetyl phosphate (Fig. S8B).
Once we had identified site-specific acetylation levels of central metabolism enzymes, we asked whether their precise location within their respective proteins might inform on their functional significance. To answer this question, we examined known tertiary structures or models of proteins in the TCA cycle and the glycolytic pathways with Pymol, a 3D-molecular structure illustration application. Twenty-three of these proteins had available E. coli crystal structures, which revealed that most of the glucose-dependent Kac sites were surface-exposed, similar to what we had recently reported for acetyl phosphate-dependent acetylation (Kuhn et al., 2014). All structural displays were uploaded to Panorama Public (see Methods) and color-coded with respect to glucose-dependence and/or acetyl phosphate dependence. Calculations of lysine pKa values and surface exposure, using the PropKa algorithm, confirmed that the majority of glucose-dependent Kac sites were located on the surface (Table S11). As an example, Figure S9 shows 15 glucose-dependent Kac sites for enolase (ENO, Fig. S9A), and 10 glucose-dependent Kac sites for 2,3-bisphosphoglycerate-dependent phosphoglycerate mutase (GPMA, Fig. S9B). Although most sites were tagged as surface accessible, we observed two internal (‘structurally buried’) regulated Kac sites: for enolase, Kac342, which is part of this enzyme’s active site, and for GPMA, Kac100, which is the binding site for its substrate 2-phospho-D-glycerate.

ACETYLATION DEPENDS ON PROPER REGULATION OF CENTRAL METABOLISM
If glucose- and, by extension, carbon-induced acetylation was a response to carbon flux, then this acetylation should be influenced by regulators of carbon flux. Therefore, in the BW25113 background used above, we constructed an isogenic set of mutants (Table I) defective for the carbon regulators CsrA, Cra, and CRP, as well as EIICBglu, the major glucose transporter. Because cAMP is the ligand for CRP, we included a mutant (cya) defective for adenylate cyclase, which synthesizes cAMP. As a negative control, we included a mutant defective for RcsB, a transcription factor not associated with central metabolism. We grew these strains in TB7 supplemented with 0.4% glucose (Fig. S10A), harvested at 10 hrs, and subjected the lysates to anti-Kac Western immunoblot analysis. The arcA, cra, csrA and rcsB mutants (strains BW27422, AJW5389, AJW5416, and AJW4483, respectively) resembled their wild-type parent (Fig. 7A). In contrast, the ptsG mutant (strain AJW5384), defective for EIICBglu and thus defective for glucose transport, resembled its wild-type parent when grown in TB7 without glucose (see Fig. 2B, far right lane). A completely different pattern was observed in the mutants deleted for crp (AJW5231) and cya (AJW5433). Although both mutants grew more slowly than their wild-type parent (Figs. S10A and S10B), both exhibited a substantial loss of acetylation (Figs. 7A and 7B), even at 24 hrs (Fig. S10C).
Since glucose-induced acetylation requires both cAMP-CRP (this study) and acetyl phosphate (Kuhn et al., 2014; Weinert et al., 2013), we examined their relationship. We constructed an isogenic set of mutants in strain AJW2179 (Table I), which is wild-type for both CRP and the Pta-AckA. It is also a lysogen of λCB42, a λ prophage that carries the core of the acs promoter fused transcriptionally to lacZ (Beatty et al., 2003b). This fusion allowed us to monitor the status of CRP, as it is required for acs transcription. In this background, we deleted crp (strain AJW2198), pta and ackA (strain AJW5105), ackA (strain AJW5174) or both crp and ackA (strain AJW5179). Each strain was transformed with a plasmid (pDCRP) that encodes wild-type CRP or its vector control (pBR322). The resultant transformants were grown at 37°C in TB7 supplemented with 0.4% (w/v) glucose and 3 mM cAMP. The latter addition was to overcome catabolite repression, which results when cells are exposed to large amounts of glucose.
Western immunoblot analysis using anti-Kac antibodies revealed decreased global acetylation in the crp mutant (Fig. 8A, lanes 7–9) relative to its wild-type parent (lanes 1–3), but increased global acetylation when CRP was overexpressed (Fig. 8B, lanes 4–6) relative to vector control (lanes 1–3). We conclude that glucose-induced acetylation depends on CRP.
As we have previously shown that glucose-induced acetylation requires acetyl phosphate (Kuhn et al., 2014), we overexpressed CRP in wild-type cells or the pta ackA mutant that cannot synthesize acetyl phosphate to determine if glucose-induced CRP-dependent acetylation requires acetyl phosphate,. Relative to its wild-type parent (Fig. 8B, lanes 1–3), the pta ackA mutant exhibited substantially decreased global acetylation (lanes 7–9), as previously reported (Kuhn et al., 2014). In contrast with overexpression of CRP in the wild-type parent (lanes 4–6), overexpression of CRP in the pta ackA mutant had very little effect on global acetylation (lanes 10–12) with one exception: a single band at ~70 kDa. These data suggest that most of CRP-dependent acetylation requires acetyl phosphate.
To determine if acetyl phosphate-dependent acetylation also requires CRP, we compared the ackA crp double mutant to the ackA single mutant. As observed previously (Kuhn et al., 2014; Weinert et al., 2013), the ackA mutant exhibited more acetylation than its wild-type parent (Fig. 8A, compare lanes 4–6 to lanes 1–3). Deletion of crp in the ackA mutant background resulted in a slight decrease in acetyl phosphate-dependent acetylation (compare lanes 10–12 to lanes 4–6), but the majority of the acetyl phosphate-dependent acetylation seen in the ΔackA mutant was still detectable. These data suggest that elevated acetyl phosphate levels can partially suppress the need for CRP, supporting the hypothesis that CRP regulates acetyl phosphate-dependent acetylation.
As it is known that CRP controls transcription primarily via two surface patches, Activation Regions 1 (AR1) and 2 (AR2), we tested whether glucose-induced acetylation depends on AR1 and/or AR2. The crp mutant strain was transformed with pDCRP, mutant derivatives lacking AR1 (pDCRPHL159), AR2 (pDCRPKE101), both AR1 and AR2 (pDCRPHL159/KE101), or pBR322 (Table I). The resultant transformants were grown at 37°C in TB7 supplemented with 0.4% (w/v) glucose without and 3 mM cAMP (Fig. S11). We found that acetylation was lost only when both surface patches were mutated (Fig. 8C). Thus, CRP-dependent acetylation requires either AR1 or AR2. We infer that glucose-induced acetylation acts through the ability of CRP to contact RNA polymerase.

DISCUSSION
It has been known for some time that lysine acetylation could regulate the function of bacterial proteins (Barak and Eisenbach, 2001; Barak et al., 1992; Fraiberg et al., 2014; Gardner and Escalante-Semerena, 2009; Garrity et al., 2007; Liang et al., 2011; Liarzi et al., 2010; Starai et al., 2002; Starai and Escalante-Semerena, 2004; Thao et al., 2010; Thao and Escalante-Semerena, 2011). Only recently, however, has the extent of this posttranslational modification been described in several landmark studies of acetylation in E. coli (Kuhn et al., 2014; Weinert et al., 2013; Yu et al., 2008; Zhang et al., 2009; Zhang et al., 2013). Our group and another have also shown that this remodeling of the acetyl-proteome largely depends on acetyl phosphate levels (Kuhn et al., 2014; Weinert et al., 2013). What is not known is the time-dependence of acetylation in response to nutrient status, the mechanisms used by cells to regulate acetylation, and its functional importance. To address these questions, we grew wild-type E. coli in buffered tryptone broth (TB7) supplemented with glucose (or lactate) and followed the temporal dynamics of growth, glucose consumption and protein acetylation. To our knowledge, this is the first longitudinal study of lysine acetylation in a bacterium.
Using Western analysis, targeted immunochemistry and mass spectrometry, we found that glucose (or lactate)-induced global acetylation increased over time. Although it began during exponential growth, the majority of acetylation occurred following entry into stationary phase. Whereas MS detected large numbers of Kac sites by 2 hrs, which corresponds to late exponential phase, both the numbers of Kac sites and the levels of acetylation of previously detected Kac sites increased substantially during transition and entry into stationary phase (5 and 8 hrs, respectively). This pattern of acetylation correlated closely with glucose consumption, which began in earnest as the culture transitioned to stationary phase. This delayed consumption of glucose likely explains why acetylation in stationary phase required continuous exposure to glucose in the medium. These observations and the fact that the vast majority of the regulated Kac sites were both time- and glucose-dependent led us to conclude that the increase in acetylation over time is a response to glucose consumption. We tested this hypothesis by deleting ptsG, which encodes the major glucose transporter, and found that glucose-induced acetylation was abolished. Indeed, the acetylation profile resembled that of cells grown in TB7 without any glucose supplementation.
We also conclude that much of glucose-induced acetylation is non-enzymatic and acetyl phosphate-dependent. We base this conclusion on several observations. First, glucose-induced acetylation depends on acetyl phosphate, as mutants lacking PTA do not exhibit glucose-induced acetylation (Kuhn et al., 2014; Weinert et al., 2013). Second, glucose-induced acetylation correlated with both glucose consumption and acetate excretion. Since acetyl phosphate is a direct precursor to acetate excretion (Wolfe, 2005), it is likely synthesized and thus available during the period of active acetylation. Third, many lysines and about half the proteins whose acetylation was regulated by glucose were also regulated by acetyl phosphate. This was especially true for central metabolic enzymes. This co-regulation probably explains why the sequence motif surrounding glucose-regulated Kac sites closely resembles the motif determined for acetyl phosphate-regulated Kac sites (Kuhn et al., 2014). Taken together, these observations support the hypothesis that glucose-regulated sites tend to be acetyl phosphate-regulated sites. Indeed, the number of acetyl phosphate-regulated Kac sites is likely underestimated, as the earlier study (Kuhn et al., 2014) did not compare cells with high acetyl phosphate (ackA) or moderate acetyl phosphate concentrations (wild-type) to cells with low acetyl phosphate concentrations (pta ackA) in media supplemented with glucose.
We previously proposed that acetyl phosphate-regulated acetylation was specific (Kuhn et al., 2014). Our results here extend that observation to glucose-dependent acetylation over an extended time period. Specifically, our mass spectrometric study showed that lysine residues on the same protein not only exhibit different susceptibilities to acetylation, but can also show markedly different acetylation rates. The dynamics of this acetylation process is more evident when presented in a color-coded network diagram across multiple time point (see Figs. 6 and S7) where the temporal changes in acetylation at specific sites and proteins in the TCA cycle, the Embden-Meyerhoff-Parnas and Pentose Phosphate pathways are depicted.
The proteins with Kac sites that were regulated in response to time and/or glucose are predominantly involved in central metabolism, most notably glycolysis (the Embden-Meyerhoff-Parnas and Pentose Phosphate pathways), gluconeogenesis, the TCA cycle, the glyoxylate bypass, fatty acid biosynthesis, and finally pyruvate metabolism, which links them all. Others have shown that acetylation is enriched in central metabolic pathways [for example, see (Kuhn et al., 2014; Weinert et al., 2013; Zhang et al., 2013)], but this is the first demonstration that enzymes in central metabolic pathways become acetylated over time in response to glucose consumption.
In most central metabolic pathways, the majority of enzymes had a least one lysine that exhibited a significant increase in acetylation both over time during growth with glucose and relative to growth without glucose (Fig. 6A–D, Fig. S7A–B). Furthermore, the lysines of these and other multiply acetylated proteins exhibited differential Kac regulation relative to glucose.
It is intriguing that the highly acetylated pathways compete with each other for carbon and/or co-factors. For example, the Embden-Parnas-Meyerhoff pathway and gluconeogenesis are opposing processes; the former metabolizes glucose 6-phosphate, while the latter synthesizes it. Glucose 6-phosphate is the initial substrate for both the Embden-Meyerhoff-Parnas and Pentose Phosphate pathways. Coenzyme A (CoA) must be partitioned between pyruvate metabolism and the TCA cycle; both pyruvate dehydrogenase and 2-oxoglutarate dehydrogenase use CoA as a substrate to synthesize acetyl-CoA and succinyl-CoA, respectively. These enzyme complexes also share a highly acetylated subunit, lipoamide dehydrogenase (LpdA) (Keseler et al., 2013). It is possible that acetylation of key enzymes helps guide metabolic competitions, providing a mechanism by which central metabolic enzymes adjust their function to the changing nutritional status of the cell. This possibility is suggested by the acetylation behavior of the TCA cycle and glyoxylate bypass enzymes and by the location of the lysines that become acetylated. Most of these glucose-regulated lysines are surface-associated, but a few acetylation sites are buried within the protein fold.
From a regulatory perspective, the connection between carbon metabolism and acetylation makes sense. When carbon flux exceeds the capacity of the TCA cycle, the result is overflow metabolism, often as acetate fermentation mediated by the Pta-AckA pathway. In this scenario, excess acetyl-CoA is converted to acetyl phosphate via Pta, instead of entering the TCA cycle (Wolfe, 2005). Indeed, glucose-induced transcription from rprA and cpxP promoters is dampened by genetic manipulations that reduce the acetyl-CoA-to-CoA ratio (Hu, 2013; Lima et al., 2011). Elevated acetyl phosphate and thus acetyl phosphate-dependent acetylation is simply indicative of conditions that favor acetate fermentation.
It is also intriguing that NAD+ is both the co-factor for the Embden-Meyerhoff-Parnas pathway enzyme GAPDH and a substrate for the lysine deacetylase CobB. This competition for NAD+ is particularly important for the acetylation status of lysines that are co-regulated by acetyl phosphate and CobB, such as K154 of RcsB (AbouElfetouh et al., 2014; Castano-Cerezo et al., 2014a; Kuhn et al., 2014). The positive charge of K154 is key to RcsB’s ability to activate rprA. A mutant that retains the positive charge (RcsB K154R) retains activity. In contrast, a mutant that mimics the acetylated form (K154Q) loses its ability to activate rprA (Hu et al., 2013). rprA is a small RNA that regulates the activity of σS, a stress-response sigma factor that helps cells transition from a transcription program suited to exponential growth to one more suited to stationary phase. The positive charge of K154 is also important for RcsB’s ability to repress flagellar expression (Castano-Cerezo et al., 2014a). The fact that K154 is reversibly regulated by acetyl phosphate and CobB, that RcsB inversely regulates rprA transcription and flagellar expression, and that glucose-induced expression of rprA correlates with that of glucose-induced acetylation, supports the hypothesis that glucose-induced acetylation has physiological relevance.
Because glucose-regulated acetylation was enriched in central metabolic pathways, we tested the hypothesis that one or more regulators of central metabolism would regulate acetylation. We conclude that glucose-induced acetylation depends on cAMP-CRP-dependent transcription. Global acetylation was substantially reduced in cya and crp mutants. It was also reduced when CRP lacked both AR1 and AR2, surface patches required for physical interaction of CRP with RNA polymerase. Our observations also suggest that most of CRP-dependent acetylation requires acetyl phosphate. Acetylation was low in cells that fail to synthesize acetyl phosphate (pta ackA), even when CRP was overexpressed. In contrast, acetylation was restored in crp mutants that accumulate acetyl phosphate (crp ackA), which is consistent with a model in which acetyl phosphate is downstream of CRP. Taken together, these observations support the hypothesis that the cAMP-CRP complex facilitates acetyl phosphate synthesis. That glucose consumption and acetate excretion are delayed in cya and crp mutants (Perrenoud and Sauer, 2005) supports this hypothesis.
Lastly, we should clarify that the cells retained yfiQ and thus the capacity to perform enzymatic YfiQ- and acetyl-CoA-dependent acetylation. Therefore, some of the detected acetylations could be due to this mechanism. However, yfiQ transcription depends on cAMP-CRP and hence YfiQ activity is limited in the presence of glucose. Thus, YfiQ- and acetyl-CoA-dependent acetylation would be strongest in the absence of glucose or after its depletion, the behavior observed for the high molecular mass band in our anti-acetyllysine Western blots. Intriguingly, glucose represses YfiQ-dependent acetylation, while inducing acetyl phosphate-dependent acetylation. This disparity argues that the two mechanisms must be different in some critical element.
In summary, this study provides new insights into the important role of glucose regulation for E. coli protein acetylation in a time-dependent fashion. It reveals a mechanism for regulating this acetylation and its potential to quickly modify proteins with impacts on entire biological pathways or networks. This study also provides experimental foundation for future studies that could investigate the dependence of acetylation on glucose (or lactate) levels, the precise mechanism(s) used by cells to delay glucose consumption until they transition to stationary phase, the mechanism used by the cAMP-CRP complex to regulate acetyl phosphate concentrations, and the effects exerted by acetylation on protein function.

METHODS

BACTERIAL STRAINS, BACTERIOPHAGE, PLASMIDS, AND CULTURE CONDITIONS
All bacterial strains, bacteriophage and plasmids used in this study are listed in Table I. Derivatives were constructed by generalized transduction with P1kc, as described previously (Silhavy et al., 1984). Transformations were performed by electroporation, or through the use of either transformation buffers 1 and 2 (Hanahan, 1983) or transformation and storage solution (Chung et al., 1989).
For strain construction, cells were grown in LB containing 1% (w/v) tryptone, 0.5% (w/v) yeast extract, and 0.5% (w/v) sodium chloride; LB plates also contained 1.5% agar. For Western immunoblot, transcription, and mass spectrometry analyses, cells were grown at 37°C in TB7 [1% (w/v) tryptone buffered at pH 7.0 with potassium phosphate (100 mM)] or TB7 supplemented with 0.4% glucose or either 0.4% or 0.8% sodium lactate. In some experiments, an appropriate volume of a 20% (w/v) stock solution of glucose or sodium lactate was added to cultures to achieve a final concentration of 0.4% (w/v) glucose or 0.8% sodium lactate. Cell growth was monitored spectrophotometrically (DU640; Beckman Instruments, Fullerton, CA) by determining the optical density at 600 nm (OD600).
Kanamycin (40 µg/ml), ampicillin (100 µg/ml), and chloramphenicol (25 µg/ml) were added to growth media when needed. To induce plasmid-encoded gene expression, 500 µM β-D-1-thiogalactopyranoside (IPTG) was added.

WESTERN IMMUNOBLOT ANALYSIS
Cells were grown and harvested as described, pelleted, and lysed with Bugbuster™ protein extraction reagent (Novagen 70584) using the manufacturer’s protocol. The whole cell protein lysate was normalized to protein concentration by BCA assay (Pierce 23225), the proteins separated by SDS-polyacrylamide gel electrophoresis with 4.6 M urea, and the gel stained with Coomassie Blue stain to verify normalization. A second gel was assessed for protein acetylation by anti-Kac Western immunoblot analysis. This gel and a nitrocellulose membrane were rinsed in water and then equilibrated for 15 minutes in transfer buffer containing 25 mM Tris, 0.192 M glycine, and 20% (v/v) methanol. Proteins were transferred onto the membrane for 1 hour at 100 V. The blot was blocked with 5% (w/v) milk prepared in PBST for 2 hrs at room temperature. The blot was washed with PBST two times for 5 min each. A rabbit polyclonal antibody raised against a Kac-containing peptide (Cell Signaling 9441) was used at a 1:500 dilution in 5% BSA in PBST at 4°C overnight. The blot was washed 3 times for 5 min each and then one time for 10 min with PBST and then incubated with HRP-conjugated goat anti-rabbit secondary antibody (Cell Signaling 7074S) at a 1:2000 dilution in 5% milk in PBST for 1 hr at room temperature. The blot was washed 4 times for 5 min each with PBST and exposed using 20X LumiGLOR Reagent and Peroxide (Cell Signaling 7003). All experiments were performed at least twice.

PROMOTER ACTIVITY ASSAYS
To monitor promoter activity from ϕ(PrprA-lacZ), 50 µl culture aliquots were harvested and added to 50 µl of All-in-One β-galactosidase reagent (Pierce Biochemical). β-galactosidase activity was determined quantitatively using a microtiter format, as described previously (Beatty et al., 2003a). As a blank, 50 µl of sterile TB7 was used. Each experiment included three biological replicates. All experiments were performed at least twice.

CELL LYSIS AND PROTEOLYTIC DIGESTION OF PROTEIN LYSATES
Cell pellets of the wild-type E. coli K-12 strain BW25113 grown in TB7 or TB7 supplemented with 4% glucose were suspended in 6 mL of PBS and centrifuged at 4°C, 15,000 g for 20 min. The firm cell pellet was collected and re-suspended and denatured in a final solution of 6 M urea, 100 mM Tris, 75 mM NaCl containing the deacetylase inhibitors 1 mM tricostatin A and 3 mM nicotinamide. Samples were sonicated on ice (5X each), cellular debris removed, and the supernatant for each sample further processed for proteolytic digestion. Typically 1.5 mg of protein lysate was reduced with 20 mM DTT (37°C for 1 hr), and subsequently alkylated with 40 mM iodoacetamide (30 min at RT in the dark). Samples were diluted 10-fold with 100 mM Tris pH 8.0 and incubated overnight at 37°C with sequencing grade trypsin (Promega) added at a 1:50 enzyme:substrate ratio (wt/wt). Samples were acidified with formic acid and desalted using HLB Oasis SPE cartridges (Waters) (Keshishian et al., 2007). Proteolytic peptides were eluted, concentrated to near dryness by vacuum centrifugation, and re-suspended in NET buffer (50 mM Tris-HCl, pH 8.0, 100 mM NaCl, 1 mM EDTA). A small aliquot of each protein digestion (~10 µg) was subjected to total protein lysate mass spectrometric analysis. The remaining tryptic peptide samples were used for affinity purification of Kac peptides.

AFFINITY PURIFICATION OF LYSINE-ACETYLATED PEPTIDES
The polyclonal anti-Kac agarose antibody conjugate from ImmuneChem (ICP0380-100) was prewashed and incubated with 1 mg E. coli digested protein lysate (in NET buffer) overnight (4°C) at a 1:25 antibody:peptide ratio (wt/wt). Beads were washed three times in NET buffer, and the enriched acetyl peptides eluted by washing three times in 1% trifluoroacetic acid/40% acetonitrile (v/v). Prior to mass spectrometric analysis, the Kac peptide enrichment samples were concentrated and desalted using C-18 zip-tips (Millipore, Billerica, MA).

MASS SPECTROMETRIC AND CHROMATOGRAPHIC METHODS AND INSTRUMENTATION
Samples were analyzed by reverse-phase HPLC-ESI-MS/MS using the Eksigent Ultra Plus nano-LC 2D HPLC system (Dublin, CA) connected to a quadrupole time-of-flight TripleTOF 5600 or a TripleTOF 6600 mass spectrometer (SCIEX). Typically, mass resolution for MS1 scans and corresponding precursor ions was ~35,000 (TripleTOF 5600) and 45,000 (TripleTOF 6600), while resolution for MS2 scans and resulting fragment ions was set at 15,000, a ‘high sensitivity’ product ion scan mode. Details for the mass spectrometric and chromatographic methods are provided in the Supplemental Methods S1. Briefly, samples were acquired in data-dependent mode on the TripleTOF 5600 and 6600 to obtain MS/MS spectra for the 30 most abundant precursor ions following each survey MS1 scan. For each of the E. coli samples (grown in TB7 with or without glucose for 12 hrs, or grown in TB7 with glucose and harvested at 2, 5, 8 and 12 hrs), we analyzed three independent biological replicates, from which data were acquired from 3 technical mass spectrometric injection replicates. Data for protein whole lysate samples also were acquired in data-independent acquisition mode, e.g., SWATH, as described in the Supplemental Methods S1.

BIOINFORMATIC DATABASE SEARCHES
Mass spectrometric data was searched using the database search engine ProteinPilot (Shilov et al., 2007) (SCIEX Beta 4.5, revision 1656) with the Paragon algorithm (4.5.0.0, 1654). Mass spectral data sets also were analyzed using a Mascot (Perkins et al., 1999) server version 2.3.02 after initially generating peak lists with the SCIEX mgf data converter version 1.3. All extensive details including search parameters, fixed and variable modifications, enzyme specificity, databases used, scoring, and false discovery rate analysis (FDR) are described in the Supplemental Methods S1. Mass spectrometric identification details are provided in Table S2 for Kac-containing peptides identified from Kac antibody-enriched fractions, and in Table S10 for all E. coli proteins identified from whole lysate (99% confidence and expectation value <0.01 were required in all cases).

QUANTITATIVE SKYLINE MS1 FILTERING ANALYSIS
MS1 chromatogram-based quantitation was performed in Skyline 2.6, an open source software project (http://proteome.gs.washington.edu/software/skyline) (MacLean et al., 2010) using a MS1 ion intensity chromatogram processing called MS1 Filtering (Schilling et al., 2012). Briefly, all raw files acquired in data dependent acquisition mode were directly imported into Skyline 2.6, and MS1 precursor ions were extracted for all peptides present in the comprehensive MS/MS spectral libraries that had been generated from corresponding database searches. The MS1 resolution setting in Skyline for precursor ion extraction was set to 10,000 for TripleTOF 5600 data and to 30,000 for TripleTOF 6600 data. Quantitative analysis was based on extracted ion chromatograms (XICs) and the resulting precursor ion peak areas for M, M+1, and M+2; final quantitative comparisons were typically based on only the highest ranked (naturally most abundant) precursor ion, which was then compared between samples.

STATISTICAL ANALYSIS OF QUANTITATIVE MASS SPECTROMETRIC DATA SETS
Each E. coli sample set grown under various conditions and investigated by mass spectrometry consisted of large pools of bacteria. Samples from each bacterial growth condition, i.e., +/− glucose supplement, were independently obtained in 3 biological replicates. Due to the nature of pooled bacteria, 3 biological replicates for each condition should account for biological variance in order to identify truly significant acetylation changes between the different conditions. Each of the biological replicate samples was processed for MS analysis and analyzed on the mass spectrometer in 3 technical (injection) replicates. Samples were acquired in randomized block-design acquisition order to avoid systematic biases. For quantitative data analysis, all peak areas obtained from extracted precursor ion chromatograms using MS1 Filtering were exported from Skyline into excel sheets using the statistical program ‘MS1Probe’ (Broudy et al., 2014; Kuhn et al., 2014). For each of the 3 biological replicates (each composed of 3 technical, MS injection replicates), the peak areas for individual Kac peptides were automatically assembled in a data array to calculate peak area ratios per peptide between the different wild-type growth conditions. Peak area ratios were formed for 12h Glc vs. 12h no Glc, and for the glucose time course as nh vs. 2h (where n=5, 8, or 12). Significance was assessed using two-tailed Student’s t-test and requiring p-values <0.05, assuming normal distributions. All relative acetylation changes for each Kac site were normalized against corresponding protein level changes as determined from proteolytically digested total lysates. To assess possible regulation of acetylation in E. coli, for a given Kac-containing peptide, we set a threshold of >2-fold change in the relative peak area between the growth conditions compared with significance of p<0.05 within each biological replicate (3 injection replicates each). To be considered a ‘candidate’ for acetylation changes between two different growth conditions, such significant up-regulation was required in at least 2 of the 3 independent biological replicates. Subsequently, for a given Kac-containing peptide, the determined Kac fold change from each biological replicate was log-transformed and averaged over the 3 biological replicates. Ratios were transformed back to a natural ratio for final reports. In cases where a specific Kac site could be identified from multiple different (redundant) acetylated peptide precursor ions due to multiple charge states of the same peptide, additional modifications, or peptides with missed tryptic cleavages, the most reproducible and most robustly ionizing species per Kac site was chosen for quantification. For calculated, significant Kac fold changes comparing between growth conditions and time points as well as variance, see Supplemental Table S4.

DATA ACCESSION
The mass spectrometric raw data associated with this manuscript may be downloaded from MassiVE at ftp://MSV000079073massive.ucsd.edu (username: MSV000079073). Furthermore, all graphical displays featuring differential rates of acetylation of individual Kac sites for >400 proteins (such as shown in Fig. 5) are uploaded to MassiVE. A Skyline spectral library file that contains all MS/MS spectra of confidently identified acetylated peptides that were subsequently used for quantitation by MS1 Filtering, was transferred to the public data-sharing Panorama site (Sharma et al., 2014). Panorama provides an interactive web-based spectral viewer of all Kac-containing peptides identified in this study (at 99% confidence and with expectation value <0.01, respectively). The interactive Panorama Public web-based spectral viewer can be accessed at https://panoramaweb.org/labkey/x5K74Q.url. All MS/MS spectral and identification details underlying the acetylome data also are displayed in Tables S2A–S2B. Acetylation site assignment was initially suggested by search engines ProteinPilot and Mascot and confirmed by manual inspection using previously defined criteria (Danielson et al., 2009).

FUNCTIONAL ANALYSIS, PROTEIN ONTOLOGY, PATHWAY ENRICHMENT ANALYSIS
For functional analysis and protein ontology analysis ‘The Database for Annotation, Visualization and Integrated Discovery’ (DAVID v.6.7) was used (Huang da et al., 2007). For pathway enrichment analysis, we used the Bonferroni correction as adjustment to p-values to determine statistical significance. As Ontology background, we initially used the complete E. coli proteome as predicted from the E. coli genome (‘entire proteome/genome background’). However, we then refined the analysis by changing the background to a subset of E. coli proteins that could actually be observed by mass spectrometric whole lysate analysis (‘MS observed protein background’ as presented in Table S9), thus avoiding abundance biases that are possible in proteomics analysis.

SUPPLEMENTARY MATERIAL
